---
tags: effort, project/nonfiction, space/work
alias: 
areas: college
project: War_On_EPA
status: project/complete
date: 2023-07-26
UID:  202307261507
---

up:: [[+ Non-Fiction]]

# DRAFT_20230716_EVR2861_War on the EPA Video Discussion

### 1. Describe in a  few paragraphs why the Obama Administration's focus on energy policy was alarming to the people of middle America and those in the fossil fuel energy sector. For example, what were their primary concerns and how did they contribute to the rise of the Tea Party movement in 2009? Is it fair to state that clean energy policies were destroying the coal industry or were other economic issues hurting coal? (4 points)

**Obama's energy policy** focused on measuring and regulating the U.S's carbon emmissions from the energy industry (oil, coal, & gas) and enforcing the EPA's current air and water quality regulations. This effort occured from 2008-2016. In his 2nd mandate (2012-2016), after failing to get Congress' help to make regulations, he used executive authority to order the EPA to plan and put into action what's known as the Clean Energy Plan. **People of middle America** consists of people with a strong federalist culture and resonate strongly with their identity as a state. They are middle class rural communities whose livelihoods are heavily reliant on the enery industry. The states in the middle of the U.S felt their livelihoods threatened by Obama's energy policies which was exacerbated by the enery industry's influence in their environment (ex. Americans for Prosperity ads). On the other hand,  the **Fossil fuel sector** in the US are big oil, coal, and gas companies with great influence in the U.S Midwest. Some names relevant to this discussion are Devon, Murray Energy, and Koch Industry. These companies felt threatened because they believe the energy policies were an attack on their bussiness, forcing them to adhere to ever-growing regulations whose motivation they didn't understand nor believe. As a result, they spend a lot of money denying climate change and undermining the results from the scientific community. In addition the economic influence of their energy bussiness, they also excert influence on the community they reside in. For example, they sponsor stadiums, banks, and build tall buildings. One such influential conservative group is The Koch brothers' Americans for Prospertity. This group ran ads and campaigns against clean energy plans which swayed the local population into believing that the new policies will negatively affect their livelihoods and that the environmental movement is made up of the elite.

**The primary concerns for middle America and fossil fuel sectors** is the perceived threat on their livelihoods. For the people its increased oil prices, potential layoffs, and encroachment of the federal government in their state. As for the fossil fuel sectorits threat to their way of doing things, profit loss, increasing regulations, and expensive changes seemly without base. These groups are culturally related to the **Tea Party movement and its 2009 uprising**. The Tea Party movement centers around the federalist mindset of state rights. They believe the federal government shouldn't tell the states what to do. This movement is most prevalent in the U.S Midwest because historically, people were encouraged to explore those lands and build their own lives with little restrictions. Midwest states are characterized by their independence and state identity. The movement became stronger because of the perceived threat of Obama's energy policies who were backed, and greatly influenced by energy company' anti-regulation propaganda.


**"Clean energy policies were destroying the coal industry" or other economic issues hurting coal?**
I think it's fair to say that Obama's clean energy policies weren't the only factor that hurt the energy sector during his administration. I believe that the recession in 2008 was also a contributing factor, and not even its most crucial. The documentary briefly mentions that the energy sector was struggling to meet demand because of the new regulations. I think the culture shock, so to speak, was a big factor and the energy sector hurt itself. They perceived they suddenly and rapidly had to change their way of doing things. Because they had never faced such strong opposition and perhaps it wasn't offered, or received, or accepted aid to make these changes, they felt at loss which led them to build resentment that fosterd a victim mentality. In addition, their company culture may be built on apathetic attitudes towards disadvantaged groups which doesn't allow them to change their established beliefs and way of life which I think is based on social and economic priviledge, consumerism, and capitalist values prevalent in the U.S. I think nobody wants to be the bad guy of the story, so their instinct was to deny the perceived accussations and stubbornly cover their ears.

### 2. Describe in a short paragraph how the Obama Administration changed its strategy for adopting clean energy policies by focusing on executive actions instead of the Legislative Branch.  How did the members of RAGA react to this strategy?  What action did they take and what role did Scott Pruitt play in this action? (4 points)

**Obama's new strategy for clean energy legislation**
Obama's first attempt (2008-2012) to pass clean energy legislation was focused in working with Congress. However, Americans for Prosperity, under the Koch Industry, had funded Congress canditates which became a Republican majority. These elected officials had pledged to oppose any legislation related to climate change that would increase government revenue. Thus, they couldn't work with Obama to put into effect any kind of Climate Tax on energy companies. For his 2nd term (2012-2016), Obama changed his strategy. Because Coungress wouldn't cooperate, he decided to use executive orders where the EPA began to develop the Clean Energy Plan. RAGA, under Pruitt's leadership, acknowledged the need for the energy sector and attorney generals to put their heads together and take a stand. As Obama entered his 2nd mandate, RAGA, Pruitt, and the Midwestern energy sector had joined to create a strike force that eventually stopped the implementation of the Clean Energy Plan.


### 3. Describe how Scott Pruitt's leadership role in RAGA led to his nomination by President Trump to the EPA administrator position. Which industry leaders played a role in his nomination and how (be specific)? Based on this, which direction do you think the EPA is headed under the Trump administration? (4 points)

Pruitt's role in RAGA connected him with oil and gas companies, in particular Southern Company lobbyst Andrew Miller who, days before the start of Obama's 2nd mandate, wrote to Pruitt to convene a 2-day meeting between corporations and their lawyers, lobbyists , Pruitt, and other Republican attorney generals to make an action plan against Obama's environmental regulations. Pruitt spearheaded a series of lawsuits against the EPA, including the Clean Energy Plan, stopping it in its tracks at the Supreme Court level. This involvement and connnections to the energy sector were factors that led to his nomination as EPA administrator after Trump's victory.

One connection in particular stands out, Robert E. Murray, or Bob Murray, from Murray Energy. He met Pruitt back when the latter was at RAGA. Murray also forged an alliance with Donald Trump for the presidential election. Although Murray didn't mention it in the interview, perhaps he might have suggested Pruitt as a Cabinet member for Trump. Other names that may have had a hand in Pruitt's nomination as EPA admin could be the Koch brother and Devon Energy. In addition, Myron Ebell of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, as the head of Trump's transition team, may have influenced Pruitt's nomination.

While at the time of writing this assignment Trump's administration has ended, his influence on the EPA are marked in history. I believe that Murray, Trump, and Pruitt's cooperation rolled back or stumped a lot of environmental regulations. For example, Trump's immediate withdrawal from the Paris Agreement must have given energy companies free reins on pollution levels and opened new bussiness opportunities. In addition, Trump lessed rules for offshore drilling. These are examples of Trump's anti-regulation administration. The mentality of climate denial in Pruitt's inner circle must have influenced major decisions of the EPA whose mission is to protect the health of its constituents the U.S's natural resources. Finally, I think Trump's EPA, as seen in many important government decisions, affected vulnerable populations the most. Deregulation on pollution limits has a cascade effect in newborns, general human health, and aging with little means to change their fate.
