---
tags:
  - effort
  - project/nonfiction
  - space/work
project: Website - Philosophy_Ethics
date: 2024-03-30
UID: 202403301303
---

# Happiness and Meaning in My Dinner with Andre

As Andre describes his life over the last few years, Wally becomes more comfortable, listening intently and respectfully engaging with their partner's ideas. I will focus on their ideas on happiness and the meaning of life.

On happiness, I find their discussion on comfort and stability to relate to the hedonism theory of happiness. For Wallie, who’s every day is a struggle to stay afloat, he appreciates when things, no matter how small, are how he expects. He enjoys his cold, morning coffee because that's where he left it the day before. For a man who doesn't know if he'll be able to pay next month's rent, this little control in his life is deeply comforting. In other words, he embraces joy because of the constant, overwhelming pain. On the other hand, Andre, whose wealth, and connections have allowed him to explore much of the world, is repulsed by comfort. He believes it is a poison that makes them numb. He craves discomfort because comfort has made him miserable to the point where he sought sublime experiences to feel. Contrary to the theory's moral judgements about pain and pleasure, Andre doesn't consider pain to be bad.

I can see myself in both stances. On the one hand, I think it's important to discern from what’s inside or outside one’s control. Through the practice of stoicism, I don’t stretch myself thin and focus on what I can do. On the other hand, I find value in going outside of my comfort zone. It is a humbling experience to realize the world that lives outside of one's mind is vast and beautiful and that I'm just a tiny, minuscule part of it.

When it comes to meaning, the characters are more than explicit in their perspective. They discuss the value of human life. Once again, Wally comforts himself with the thought that everything about his life has value because the alternative is downright terrifying and it would mean diminishing his struggles. However, he's also a perfectly rational man. A fortune cookie warning him to not take a flight cannot foretell the future. To him, it's just absurd. Some things are just coincidences and people make up stories about seemly unrelated things having a purpose when there isn't. He trusts science because despite its relativity in the large scheme of things, the effort that goes into scientific investigation has yielded facts he can base his life on. Again, Wally is someone who requires stability, facts, and routine. Andre holds a vastly different opinion. To him, those coincidences have meaning, and he listens to them. Statistics and a fortune cookie hold the same kind of unknown that have the same worth. Although, he doesn't give human life the same kind of value. I think he's so critical about it because he considers his life outside art to have been a performance. He performs as a father and a husband for his perfect little family and as a director in the workplace. His life was worthless because he hasn't been fully present. His travels and meeting people so disconnected with his culture and reality a struggle to find clarity. Who am I? Where do I come from? Where am I going? After finding success in his career and building a loving family, what else is he to do with his life?

Here, I admit I lean towards Andre's situation than Wally. I used to strongly agree with Wally's position but like Andre, the more I think and mull over my dissatisfaction with the world and myself, the more I seek the unknown and move away from Western civilization. Although I chose to move to another country to live the life I want to live, when I'm swamped with tasks and responsibilities, I feel my motivation isn't enough to carry me through and I feel a little disappointed that perhaps I am wasting my time. Fortunately, those moments come and go. I don't know if life is worth living but I think experiencing it from start to end is the best and perhaps only thing I can do.