---
tags: 
	- effort
	- project/nonfiction
	- space/work
date: 2023-07-27
UID:  202307271007
---

# Environmental Policy Analysis: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)

## Problem Identification and Agenda Setting

The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)'s and U.S History are intricately linked. Efforts to recover from the Great Depression and Hitler's attacks on neighboring countries led to the U.S’ support to the Allies, improving the national economy. After the war, U.S citizens, both veterans and civilians, were promised a better life. War rationing and saving gave way to mass consumption as both the government and industries sold the idea the patriot was the consumer **(Pruitt, 2020)**. Due to the increase in demand, consumption skyrocketed. Industries pumped out new products at lightspeed, and people, mostly white families, were eager to invest. This new American way of life had severe consequences in the environment, from careless dumping on water bodies to open air burning, the way the U.S was consuming was historically unprecedented. There were no guidelines on how to manage the massive amounts of waste households and industries generated in their daily operations.

The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) is the RCRA's predecessor. Under the SWDA, the federal government assisted states and municipalities to responsibly manage their solid waste; they had no authority over the process **(GovTrack, 2023)**. The passing of the RCRA gave the federal government, through the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), regulatory power to handle waste from cradle-to-grave. This paper aims to describe the RCRA and the other amendments in the SWDA.

## Policy Formulation and Policy Adoption

The RCRA originated in Congress. Introduced in 1975 by Democrat Senator Jennings Randolph of WV—chair of the Committee of Public Works—now known as Committee of Environment and Public Works. In parallel, the bill was introduced in the House in 1976 by Democrat Pennsylvania Representative Frederick Rooney. The committees involved in the adoption process of this bill were the Environment & Public Works in the Senate and the Energy & Commerce Committee in the House. The Senate passed the RCRA on June 30th, 1976, days before it was introduced in the House. Thus, as the proposed bill went to the Whole House for voting, the Energy & Commerce Committee decided on Sept. 10th to pass their RCRA bill as the Senate's, pass it to a Whole House voting, and replace it with the Senate's if it won the voting **(Gov Track, 2023)**. On a final note, the Senate's RCRA that passed in the House was amended and sent back to the Senate for agreement. The RCRA was signed into law by former President Ford on Oct 21st, 1976, a year and a half after its initial introduction to Congress.

### Policy Implementation

The RCRA’s main effort, despite the implications in its name, is not the conservation and recovery of resources but the cradle-to-grave management of hazardous and non-hazardous waste. Thanks to the RCRA, the U.S has strict national regulations on solid waste disposal, a permit system for hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal, and supports research and development of waste management technologies **(U.S Congress, 1976**).

The implementing body of the RCRA is the EPA. The EPA oversees the publication and compliance of environmental regulations. These regulations affect hazardous waste generators, government agencies, small businesses, and gas stations with underground petroleum tanks **(EPA, 2023)**. They must comply or face severe financial penalties which may lead to loss of profits and the closing of the non-compliant facility. Hazardous waste producers are the most involved with the RCRA. They must request a permit subject to renewal to dispose of their waste. However, some amendments exonerate some types of waste from treatment and disposal regulations.

## Policy Evaluation

Since the RCRA, the SWDA has been amended three more times. The 1984 Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments, the 1992 Federal Facilities Compliance Act, and the most recent, the 1996 Land Disposal Program Flexibility Act **(EPA, 2023)**. The RCRA has been subject to smaller amendments such as the Bevill and Bentsen Exclusions in 1980. Its purpose was to give the EPA time to gather more data on the effects of waste generated by the exploration, development, and combustion of fossil fuels in the environment and health.

In "Background on and Implementation of the Bevill and Bentsen Exclusions in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act: EPA Authorities to Regulate “Special Wastes," the author concludes the EPA has limited authority on further regulation of Bevill and Bensten wastes. The EPA stated that the cost of managing the tremendous amount of waste related to fossil fuels as hazardous waste would be economically stressful to states' budget and industry.

## Policy Conclusion

The RCRA, while unsuccessful in waste recovery and resource conservation practices, is a comprehensive guide on solid waste management (SMW). It is backed by extensive research and created effective technology to mitigate the dangers of improper solid waste. I respect the successful effort to close landfills and open-air burning facilities, and instead support states and local governments to change their SWM practices based on the latest research and current technology. I think there should be a national effort, whether it is to amend the RCRA or another act or pass a new act altogether to address Bevill and Benster wastes. Apart from the U.S being a big carbon polluter, the secondary waste from activities related to fossil fuels have a local, national, and global impact. The future of the RCRA looks stable as the lack of evidence any threats to its existence. I wish the RCRA would one day live up to its name. That the amendment supported conservation efforts and incentivized industries and people to produce less waste by reducing consumption. As a student from a small, developing country, conservation and creative use of resources are part of my culture. Thus, I am baffled by the lack of vision from U.S industries to see the potential of second-hand materials.

## References

1.      HISTORY Channel article: [https://www.history.com/news/post-world-war-ii-boom-economy](https://www.history.com/news/post-world-war-ii-boom-economy)

2.      GovTrack.us. (2023). S. 2150 — 94th Congress: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Retrieved from https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/94/s2150

3.      GovTrack.us. (2023). H.R. 14496 — 94th Congress: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Retrieved from https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/94/hr14496

4.      Luther, Linda. Background on and Implementation of the Bevill and Bentsen Exclusions in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act: EPA Authorities to Regulate "Special Wastes", report, August 6, 2013; Washington D.C.. ([https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc227885/](https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc227885/): accessed August 1, 2023), University of North Texas Libraries, UNT Digital Library, [https://digital.library.unt.edu](https://digital.library.unt.edu/); crediting UNT Libraries Government Documents Department.

5.     EPA Overview: https://www.epa.gov/rcra/resource-conservation-and-recovery-act-rcra-overview

6.     EPA History: https://www.epa.gov/rcra/history-resource-conservation-and-recovery-act-rcra#history