---
tags:
  - effort
  - project/nonfiction
  - space/work
areas: college
project: IDH3600_Confronting the Holocaust_Film Essay
date: 2024-06-06
UID: 202406061906
---

%%
use whatever metadata is relevant for your project
%%

# Music in The Pianist and Zone of Interest (Comparison Film Essay)

One of the purposes of art is to immortalize thoughts, emotions, and experiences. The art of film has at its disposal many different art forms that have developed throughout human history. After visuals, hearing is the next sense performance art uses to communicate its message. While in film, orchestral music has a long history, ambiance music, a more subtle genre, has also been used. In portraying the horrors of the Holocaust, filmmakers have to choose carefully where to add musical scores. In the wrong place, it can overdramatize the horrors of Nazi ideology and the suffering of innocent victims. With minimal use of musical scores, the films use sound to communicate hope for a better future and the chaos in Auschwitz during the Holocaust.

In The Pianist, melody represents hope in the face of persecution. In The Pianist, Chopin's "Andante spianato et grande polonaise brillante" expresses Władysław Szpilman's desire to regain his previous life. In the scene where Władysław Szpilman plays the melody in his mind at one of the hideouts, his fingers travel across the piano with a smile across his face. This scene shows his longing for normality and connection with society. This is a moment of comfort among the chaos, confusion, and anxiety of his new life. The melody is a set for piano and orchestra. He cannot play it on his own. He yearns for the orchestra, and human company, and plays this melody as a form of connection. He wants to go back to those times were he played for an audience. Music is his greatest talent which led him to form the connections that saved his life. He allows himself that small moment of comfort, aware that he cannot touch the keys or be discovered and exposed. The situation prevents him from connecting with others. The Nazi persecution of Jewish people has torn him from his passion. If he had played the piano, the audience wouldn't have answered kindly. Thus, the final scene where this melody plays brings the movie full circle. The film's final scene shows Władysław Szpilman's music career restored. He plays the melody with the orchestral he longed for. He's The Pianist once again. The people acknowledge him. His connection with society has been mended. He feels human again.

In contrast, the soundscape of The Zone of Interest portrays the horrors of Auschwitz. They are represented through drone ambiance and sound effects such as gunshots, screams and cries, and the crematorium's fire. Drone ambiance is at the forefront of the first night vision scene where the maid leaves a trail of apples during the dead of the night for the forced labor workers. The message is implicit. She's deep into the monster's belly, sneaking to make those people's lives just a bit less painful. She cannot end their pain but at least alleviate it ever so slightly. The lack of explanation of this scene makes the viewer think, "Why is she leaving apples in the trench? Who are those _for_?" When the realization hits, the drone ambiance makes the horror of the scene dawn. The maid, like everyone else in the house, is aware of the violence and exploitation nearby. She faces it head-on. How terrifying must it be to go to such a place in the dead of the night, sneaking behind guards? Who knows of the consequences if she had been caught? Perhaps she would become one of the people she was trying to help. Apart from scene-specific music (if drone ambiance can be called such), the film is littered with sound effects that leave a lot to the imagination. Like the maid, Hedwig's mother acknowledges the reality behind the wall and is deeply disturbed to the point of a sleepless night ending with her premature departure. She's one of the few characters to jump at the sound of a gunshot, although this doesn't mean her attitude towards Jewish people is one of compassion. In contrast, the Hoss family is apathetic towards the violence on the other side of the wall, including the burning of bodies after the crematorium's improvement. This apathy is the link between Story A, the life of the Hoss family, and Story B, the happenings in the camp. The disjoint, or the lack of acknowledgment of both sides to the existence of each other is perhaps the core message of the movie. The apathy of the German people and their aides as part of the killing machine.

The Pianist and The Zone of Interest use music and sound to portray emotions from two sides of the Final Question. The Jewish people hoped that the violence would soon end and their lives would go back to normal, illustrated by Władysław Szpilman's performance of Chopin's "Andante spianato et grande polonaise brillante" as a way of comfort during his hiding and the restoration of his public life and career as a pianist. On the other hand, The Zone of Interest, using ambient music and violent sound effects, illustrates Germany's apathy towards the suffering of the persecuted.