---
tags: 
	- effort
	- project/nonfiction
	- space/work
date: 2023-08-22
UID:  202308221608
---

%%
use whatever metadata is relevant for your project
%%


# Reflecting on my Ecological Consciousness

In this reflection, carefully consider your own ecological consciousness and identity. What does nature mean to you? Where do you find nature? Are there any key memories from your early years about being in nature? What are your environmental values? How are these values reflected in your life? Are there challenges in living according to your values? Consider steps you could take to change your own behavior to better align with your values. Where do you want to grow and change? Are your values reflected in your studies, your work, your friendships, and daily practices? How might you also work for larger scale change around the issues that motivate you?

Thank you for the opportunity to reflect on my environmental values and the personal history that has shaped them. I consider that in the twenty-five years I have lived, there are two dominant narratives that have shaped my perspective and relationship with nature: that of material excess and wealth, and of connection and unity with the natural world. As I grew up, I had the impression that my father wanted me to have a connection with the United States. I was born in the U.S but my father was culturally Latin America. With much effort, I would be ignorant of the power that a U.S citizen that I possess while living in South America, Ecuador. In addition, my early life was characterized by material abundance as well as love. Receiving a lot of gifts during holidays and birthdays was ramped up by the adults around me so I internalized the attitude that having or buying stuff was morally good. Some years later, as I continued to observe the people around me, I grew acutely aware of the contradictory narratives from society.

Some of the most precious memories that I have are about travel. When I was little, our family took frequent trips to different provinces around the country. We visited extended family and family friends. It was not until I was fourteen that I traveled abroad to the United Stated after being born. This is important because it represent that the contact, I have with American culture is mostly second-hand. Back to topic, as I continue to rewrite my personal history, the places that I remember the most fondly are those with little industrial footprint. That is, my grandma's house at the beach, an extended family's hacienda, and other green places. I was not an outgoing or adventurous child, but those places had a profound effect on my development as a human being that I still cannot put into words. It is frustrating to find value in an experience and being unable to enjoy the experience to the fullest because it only exists as an intangible, a story that cannot be changed. So, how did these experiences shape my ecological consciousness? The natural world, that is, non-human species and environments where non-human species outnumber humans, have been an unacknowledged companion. As a sensitive and timid child, I enjoyed gazing at the birds perched in the trees, a waterfall at the side of the road, and a bee feed from an orchid. Nature and its gifts have made me stop on my tracks. As an adult with adult responsibilities, I find this to be an important lesson. To stop.

Another relevant part of my ecological values is the repair mentality. Mend and repair are cultural influences. Unfortunately, I cannot give a historical retrospective on this topic, nor an educated analysis on Ecuadorian perspectives on nature. The education system just was not that good, and the remnant of European colonialism are still strong, so no credit has been given for non-European participants who shaped Ecuadorian identity, if that is even a concept that the society cares about. In other words, it is unknown to me as to why mend and repair mentalities are so prevalent in the culture, I was raised in. At the same time, ideas of materialism were also prevalent. On the one hand, buying stuff was good, and on the other, it is better to mend get a pair of shoes repaired than to get a new pair. The local industry just could not keep up with that demand, but it is not my job to do that kind of research or even write to such depths. Anyways, I have vivid memories of getting many outfits refitted at the local tailor, and even getting a couple of dressed handmade for religious occasions. Renting outfits for formal events is also incredibly common rather than purchasing them. While I did not learn to sew nor fix my clothes, which I find to be a great injustice on my parents' side, I have come around and have come to learn a thing or two and like to support my local tailor whenever possible. I am grateful that these services have been accessible throughout my whole life. When something stops performing its function, my first instinct is to have it repaired rather than disposing of it.

In recent years, I have interacted with the concept of identity. At first, I found it necessary, like the solution to my mental anguish after the way I saw the world was thrown out of balance. I played around with different labels and decided I just do not understand it and my interpretation of it is vastly different than what the American society is offering. As an immigrant and non-cis-het person, I experience culture shock on a regular basis. Being in an unfamiliar land, there are certain familiar symbols that ease my anxiety. These symbols are no part of me, and I do not have a particularly verbose attachment to them. These symbols give me comfort, a reminder of home. If I were home, I would not keep these symbols close. I am open about my differences, cultural and political, because people assume I have a similar cultural background. Such misunderstanding causes great distress. Saying, "I'm different," is just as stressful but at least I do not feel like a liar. Now, the purpose of the symbols I wear are for connection, rather than separation. They are a message to those who understand those symbols, saying "I am here. You are not alone." I would describe these symbols as external rather than internal. They describe my background, not my present. They describe where I come from, not where I am or will go. Thus, my ecological consciousness has no bearing in my identity because in my mental models there is no such concept. I have no Ecuadorian, asexual, or non-binary identity even though I use would use these words to describe myself because these words are a shorthand to complex ideas, like the tip of an iceberg, that help me communicate with people of equally diverse backgrounds. I am incredibly happy to have gotten the chance to ramble about this!

To understand my environmental values (because I have not put them into words before), I am turning back the clock to 2020. For many people, it was the worst year of their lives, for me, it was an opportunity to remake myself. I took a long hard look at who I had been until then, stopped, and sketched my ideal life. The pandemic threw the lid open to the flaws in modern society, and I witnessed discussions about how people ought to change the way they had lived until then. Inspired, I did more introspective and outside work than ever before. I asked myself to challenge questions. After finding the path I wanted to walk, I began to change the world around me. During that time, I lived with my parents. The first thing that I wanted to change in our house was the amount of stuff we had which we had brought from our previous place about half a decade ago. Eventually, my parents came around. They found some benefits in owning less stuff and giving away things they did not need anymore. For my mom, that meant fewer things to keep track of and clean. For my dad, he was learning about blue economy and his interests are as diverse as mine. Overall, we found a middle ground where our beliefs and goals aligned. As a solo endeavor, research into self-sufficiency led me to gardening and composting. My dad eventually joined gardening, and he continues to care for the few plants we have in our concrete front yard. These fun projects helped me get closer to my parents and the time we shared was precious to me. These first drastic changes in life allowed me to make room for the things that brought joy and fulfillment to my life, relationships. If it were not for what happened in 2020, I would not be as passionate as I am about life.

So, what *are* my environmental values? I had not heard the concept before. I remind me of an elementary school exercise that classifies values in different boxes like academic values, personal values, etc. The value system that I have used for a few years now is structured as **Foundational, Structural, Surface, and Imaginary Values**. I use this system from The Minimalists. So, while I cannot describe my environmental values, I can offer a description of some things that I do every day, for I am aware that as a citizen in a first-world country, the impact of my choices has a deep echo in other parts of the world.

But before that, a brief tangent. Minimalism is one of the concepts that I use to guide my choices. Because I do not have an identity, I do not call myself a minimalist, nor an essentialist, nor an eco-minimalist. These words are guides that allow me to communicate complex ideas to others, find like-minded people, and relevant resources.

1. I make an active effort to limit my carbon footprint. This is part of the on-going effort to live a meaningful life. I understand that buying something I do not really need means taking someone else's opportunity away. Thus, I limit spending and own the things that I need. In addition, I am mindful of the resources I consume.

2. Food, water, and resource conservation efforts are like a fun personal game in my everyday life. For example, turning off the lights when I am not using them, decluttering, donating obsolete items, and preventing food waste. I am always thinking about how I can make my life more efficient. I constantly ask myself "What do I *really* need?" I am always changing, always asking questions to improve.

3. Purchasing things that I need in a new state is always the last resort. My knee-instinct is, "how do I satisfy a need with something I don't have to spend money on?" This time-consuming effort is a necessary stopgap to prevent needless spending. As a college student, there are lots of free resources I can make use of, and as a citizen in a consumerist country, second-hand items are found in abundance. I am fine with being frugal because I want to put my time and energy into relationships, growth, and creative endeavors. My Foundational Values. If I make it a pain for myself to shop online and in person for non-essential items because I would not be able to live, then that time can go the things I care deeply about.

4. Other actions that reflect on my relationship with the outside world is to keep spaces tidy. By maintaining good cleaning habits, I respect the space, myself, and others who share I share it with. This includes tidying up after me and picking up after others. For example, picking up litter, keeping the table I eat on clean, and making sure to not leave a footprint in the outside world.




