---
tags: 
	- effort
	- project/nonfiction
	- space/work
alias: Essay #1: Going Deep
date: 2023-08-22
UID:  202308221608
---

%%
use whatever metadata is relevant for your project
%%


# Sensitive Men in an Insensitive World: Psychoanalyzing Key Figures of American Nature Writing

## Introduction + Thesis

Henry David Thoreau and John Muir are key figures that shaped modern perceptions of nature and the outdoors on U.S soil. They rejected and pushed back against dominant cultural ideologies and political attempts that encouraged the exploitation and destruction of the natural world. One of Thoreau's legacies is the ideology of "simple living," exemplified in his attempt to live at Walden Pond. On the other hand, Muir had a profound effect in the "preservation of sublime natural spaces" which gave rise to the concept of National Parks.

When examining Henry David Thoreau and John Muir's life and work, a commonality can be found. Both expressed emotionally and spiritually heightened experiences in the natural world, regardless of their personal concepts of wilderness/nature. Through the lenses of Personality Psychology, we can attempt to demystify these experiences. The secret behind these experiences lies in their temperament. Temperament proposes that animals have certain consistent and unchanging behaviors that stem from their biological makeup (American Psychological Association, n.d.)

In Thoreau and Muir's case, it is possible that their temperaments affected how their brains processed sensory and environmental stimuli. By proposing that Thoreau and Muir's personal philosophies have roots in their biology, we seek to pull them down from their pedestal as historical masculine figures and portray their sensitivity and capacity for empathy in a positive and constructive manner accessible to the public.

### Paragraph 1

Henry David Thoreau's attempt to live in the wilderness reverberates to this day. He lives on in popular media such as the movie The Dead Poets Society, and social movements such as environmentalism, minimalism, anti-consumerism, and other countercultures against European narratives of excess. Yet, in his journal, he expresses a sense of alienation from his community. At thirty-four years old he writes, "I am differently timed. This rapid revolution of nature, even nature in me. Why should it hurry me?" Then, he states, "the society which I was made for is not here." (Thoreau, 2009, p. 62)**.** Not long after, he recounts a mystical experience at sunset, "for this red vision excites me, stirs my blood, makes my thoughts flow and I have new indescribable fancies," and expresses his disappointment when hearing a scientific rebuttal that to him, leaves no place for the imagination. "If there is not something mystical in your explanation, something unexplainable to the understanding, some elements of mystery, it is quite insufficient." (Thoreau, 2009, p. 101)**.** He is aware that he perceives the world intensely and that others don't share his experience. His impressions of being "differently timed" and emotional highs can be explained if Henry David Thoreau possessed the Sensory Processing Sensitivity temperamental trait. Coined by Dr. Elaine Aaron, Sensory Processing Sensitivity, or SPS, is considered an innate quality found in many animal species. Described by the acronym D.O.E.S. (Aron, 2010), the main qualities of SPS are Depth of Processing, Overstimulation, Emotional Reactivity and Empathy, and Sensing the Subtle.

Across his life and work at Walden Pond, his trip to Mount Katahdin, and in his address "Slavery in Massachusetts," Henry David Thoreau distinctly displays all four key traits that characterize Sensory Processing Sensitivity. Thoreau's development of ecological thinking at Walden Pond can be interpreted as an example of Depth of Processing. His otherworldly experience at the top of Mount Katahdin can be Sensing the Subtle, the voice of Mother Earth, and Overstimulation by the sublime. And lastly, his speech after Anthony Burns' arrest could have been motivated by Emotional Reactivity and Empathy.

Moving to Walden at the age of twenty-four Pond gave Thoreau the opportunity to interact with more living things than ever before. At the edge of Concord society lived free slaves, poor whites, immigrants, and day laborers. Thoreau considered that their "impoverished lives" by society standards allowed them to live closer to nature and lead simpler lives. Then, as word of his life experiment spread, he entertained visitors from all over the country, sharing his message of a simple life. Through a public persona and performance, the "brash and boastful" Thoreau caught the public's attention. In contrast, the "quiet and introspective" Thoreau became part of Walden Woods' fauna. His non-human companions consisted of critters such as mice, squirrels, birds, and others that tried to feed from the crops he painstakingly grew for subsistence. Laura Walls Dassow explains how through his interactions with visitors, social outcasts, animals, and the environment, Thoreau's perception of the world expanded. "To see this meant widening his sense of responsibility to the largest circle of all, beyond house, beyond neighbors, to the world of nature. Or perhaps, he realized, it was the circle of nature that extended to include himself." (Walls, 2017, p. 201). This tendency for deep introspection is best described as Depth of Processing. Thoreau's life at Walden was characterized by the careful consideration of his actions and words towards other living things. From his initial plan to move to Walden Woods, to problem-solving the challenges he encountered there, Thoreau considered issues such as behavior towards the woodchucks that wanted to steal his beans, the lives of the marginal Concord society, and the ethics of eating meat. His time at Walden produced two works, "A Week on Concord and Merrimack Rivers" and "Walden, or Life in The Woods." The former was an ode to his late brother, a "basket of delicate texture" and the latter was "a scripture" written by his own hand. Both works took decades to materialize, like cooking over the fire, patience and discipline were crucial. There is a reason why Highly Sensitive People, those that display the SPS trait, feel discomfort when hurried. They want to weigh up all options and explore their consequences before making a choice, for they only then, like Thoreau, say they have lived deliberately.

At Mount Katahdin, Thoreau encountered the sublime. A place that exists outside time, outside the realm of society. Somewhere truly alien. Untouched by human hands. Yet untamed. Wilderness. At the top, Thoreau hears the voice of Mother Earth. She chastises him, "why came Ye here before your time— This ground is not prepared for ... I have never made this soil for thy feet, this air for thy breathing... Why seek me here where I have not called you and then complain that I am not your genial mother." (Walls, 2017, p. 224). He describes an alien, unwelcoming Mother Nature. Hostile to his presence, as if he had trespassed into a sacred territory. Just like when describing the blood-stirring red clouds, Thoreau acknowledges his inability to satisfactory put into words this spiritual experience. There is some other, unknown part of his existence that was able to sense hostility and communicate it to his conscious brain. Likewise, the quality of Sensing the Subtle is about acquiring knowledge from unknown origins. It is perceiving sensory and environmental stimuli and the strong reaction to act upon such knowledge. Thus, after only a few minutes, Thoreau descended from the mountain, possessed to try to put into words what only he was privy of. In his recollection, Thoreau is still overwhelmed by the experience. He writes, "Think of our life in nature, —daily to be shown matter, to come in contact with it, —rocks, trees, wind on our cheeks! the solid earth! the actual world! common sense! Contact! Contact! Contact! Who are we? where are we?" (Walls, 2017, p. 227)**.** He seems confused to the point of realizing his own existence. The most basic of sensations become alien; as if everything he had taken for granted until then, "the wind on our cheeks, the solid earth," he was experiencing for the first time. Thus, he writes with child-like curiosity, "Contact, contact, contact!" To an overstimulated HSP, performing the most basic actions becomes a challenge. Their minds, usually keen and sharp, become dull and sluggish. Words lose their meaning, and everything becomes unfamiliar, even their own minds and body. For HSPs, "the pesky O" is a daily companion. Their brains can only take so much stimulation. Down time is crucial for their sanity and health. While the work Thoreau created based on this experience isn't as well-known as Walden, Thoreau continues to feel and perceive deeply to the point of over exhaustion, bringing us to the last and most important quality of SPS and one of the most painful and unconventional appearances of New England's hermit public life.

If HSPs have the innate ability to tap into intimate knowledge about the world and people around them, then why are sensitive people portrayed as helpless victims on one extreme or saints on the other? Why don't they use their gift take to stand above others? While it is possible for HSPs to manipulate and hurt others, modern stereotypes exaggerate their capacity for empathy and emotional reactivity. This quality of unbridled emotion and empathy is best exemplified in Thoreau's life when he learned of the arrest of a fugitive slave, Anthony Burns, which Laura Walls Dassow eloquently narrates. "Three years before, when Thomas Sims was arrested, Thoreau pounded out pages of outrage but kept silent. Now he was again possessed, tucking a pencil under his pillow so he could vent the rage keeping him awake at night. This time he was ready to speak. All that June, Thoreau stoked the fires he had banked after Sim's arrest, pouring onto the pages the fresh fuel of his fury, and pounding it all together into the inflammatory address 'Slavery in Massachusetts'" (Walls, 2017, p. 346)**.** Thoreau chooses to make a public statement, for he can no longer tolerate the current state of affairs. The Fugitive Slave Law had been in effect for four years, forcing European settlers to denounce all former slaves to the nearest government office or face severe consequences. It is no wonder that community policing is portrayed in dystopian fiction such as 1984. It destroys trust between neighbors and inside families. It is a situation where the government exerts an invisible hand over the people. Freedom is no more. Fire is an appropriate metaphor for the volatile behaviors caused by Emotional Reactivity. When triggered, the reactions are intense and explosive. Wise ones know to not stoke the hearth or lest they be burned. While in Western culture, rage is considered an acceptable emotion for masculine-presenting people, Thoreau doesn't choose violence. Instead, he uses his most powerful weapon, his pen, his voice, and his thoughts. As it soon publicized, Henry David Thoreau's official stance on slavery is neither pro-government nor anti-government. Instead, as he writes in his journal, in a country where slavery is allowed life itself is worthless; all things with it, that feed it, are worthless (Thoreau, 2009, p. 267). Through his time at Walden, Thoreau understood that harming a single living being meant harming all other lives. The slave isn't the only the one in bound but the ones that support the system that made subjugation possible are convinced of its righteousness and in time, become trapped in such thinking. The chains are therefore metaphorical but no less real as those around the slave's feet, human or non-human. The slave owner is as dependent, even more than the slave themselves, on the system that perpetuates that lifestyle. Thus, when political support changes sides--which always eventually does--the chains of the abusers become the hardest to break, for there is no sturdier chain than the one that can't be seen, even a sturdier the one that was backed by social or political approval at any point in time. In his journal, the address, and later in Civil Disobedience, Thoreau extends boundless empathy to all living things. He doesn't villainize the government that legalized the exploitation of human beings and the environment, nor the people that benefit directly and indirectly from it. Instead, he offers redemption; the lotus, the Buddhist symbol of enlightenment. Thoreau is convinced that people can change, that they can live without depending on slave labor. That no matter how disgusting the actions of their race were, no matter the sins they committed to live in relative luxury while others worked to death, change is possible. They might never become clean, pay their dues for crimes, or even receive forgiveness but that doesn't mean they couldn't try. They will never be innocent, but they might one day be innocent enough.

The Thoreau that wrote and performed "Slavery in Massachusetts" and "Civil Disobedience" encapsulates him, and by extension all Highly Sensitive People at their peak. Thoreau interweaves in his most intimate beliefs and experiences; Walden, his night in jail, his meditations, and everything he stands for. When the contemplative silences meet smoldering indignation at the corner of injustice, they hop in the train of empathy towards the magical unknown. Like Thoreau at Katahdin, no one knows what an HSP will find at the top, not even themselves. However, there is value in reflecting on these experiences and trusting one's gut. Thoreau did, and while he didn't receive the recognition he undoubtedly deserved, we cannot accurately measure our lives with our own scales, for our time on this earth may be short, but our print eternal. We are part of something bigger in ways modern science hasn't been able to grasp.

If there is a portrait of Thoreau I could add to the cultural memory of New England's not-hermit, it would be that of a candle that burned fast because he lived intensely. I genuinely believe that Henry David Thoreau accomplished what he set out to do at Walden, "live deliberately and confront the essential facts of life." Fortunately, Thoreau isn't the last who traveled such thorny path. His steps were soon followed by another lover of life, John Muir.  
 

### Paragraph 2

John Muir lives on as a man larger than life whose contribution to modern American environmental thought cannot be understated, putting sublime natural spaces at the forefront of preservation efforts during the age of the end of the frontier. In his recollections about his boyhood in Scotland to his arrival at Yosemite and beyond, Muir's journals are permeated with a passion and love for nature and outdoors. To humanize his extraordinary life and work, we must step into his shoes and see through his eyes. We must seek an explanation about how he experienced the world. Muir's authentic arousal by the beauty and spirituality he found in natural spaces (Muir, 2008, p. 100). can be interpreted with the High Sensory Seeking temperamental trait. Sensation Seeking is described as the need for novel and complex sensations and experiences and the willingness to take risks to obtain them (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 10). High Sensory Seekers are characterized by their need for thrill and adventure, their willingness to seek novel experiences, their loss of self-control, and their susceptibility to boredom.

#### Topic Sentence II. Muir

John Muir exhibits all qualities of High-Sensation Seeking. From his child-like curiosity towards his new home in American soil, to his passion for invention during adolescence, and his adulthood at Yosemite

###### Main Point

As a young boy, the desire for thrill and adventure and his susceptibility to boredom led Muir to the woods.

Then, as a teen, he grew obsessed with machines to the point of losing sleep,

and as an adult, the temporary loss of his vision led him to travel all over the country to experience all of God's creation.

###### Support 1. That Glorious Wisconsin Wilderness

Muir's autobiography stands out as one considers the human and non-human inhabitants.

In "The Wilderness World of John Muir", he recounts his first impression of his new home. He writes, "Oh, that glorious Wisconsin wilderness! Everything new and pure in the very prime of spring when Nature's pulses were beating highest and mysteriously keeping time without own! Young hearts, young leaves, flowers, animals, the winds and the streams and the sparkling lake, all wildly, gladly rejoicing together!" (Muir, The Wilderness World of John Muir, 2001, p. 32)

###### Support 2. Passion for Inventing

"His obsessed mind dreamed of machines all the time, even when he was not whittling--machines that often had no obvious function or would not work if they were ever built." (Muir, A passion for nature the life of John Muir, 2008, p. 64)

###### Support 3. Yosemite

"His whole body, not his eyes alone, felt the beauty around him. Every sense became intensely alive." (Muir, A passion for nature the life of John Muir, 2008)

  
  

### Conclusion

In drafting this essay, I _burned._ I burned with the joy of writing, frustration of being unable to stand up to my own expectations, sadness from the struggle to fit in, raged at the expectations that to me seemed unfair. I considered myself both a Highly Sensitive Person and a High-Sensory Seeker. My body tends to contemplate life in silence, and only after putting my thoughts together do I dare to share them. In addition, if it has been idle for too long, both physically and intellectually, it seeks adventure and novelty. I separate my conscious from my body because from experience, they operate on different time zones. My body is the vehicle in which my mind makes sense of the world, like the horse and the equestrian. In trying to do deep, I strived to create a portrayal of Highly Sensitive People and High Sensory Seekers given the cultural and historical differences between me and the subjects. The result is satisfactory. In this version, I have put years of reflection, experience, and knowledge on Highly Sensitive People and to a lesser extent, Henry David Thoreau. For the time I didn't spend with him, I made up with research and ingenuity. My biggest struggle was focus, for there were many things I could compare these two men that were of interest to me. Writing techniques, religion, philosophy, ethics, cultural background, and many others. To find my focus, I pondered over which of these options I could go _deep. To_ me, depth takes time and effort. However, I was constrained by time, content, and length. I had to be clever about it. I had to be _smart_ as much as I was passionate. I decided on temperament because, like many other of my essays, it is a current topic of interest. This approach has served me well. But, this time, there was something different. The one that I am now is different from the one who wrote their last piece. This essay had to fit into the larger scheme of my intellectual journey, which was the motivation for taking the class that led to its creation. Thus, its connections grew larger, which I had to have clear to increase the focus. Part of this larger scheme is learning about the background of the United States' perceptions of nature. This meant that my efforts had to connect with the legacy that I could attest to. I had barred looking at Thoreau and Muir through a microscope, instead acknowledging their connections to the now. After rewriting my reflections, the vision of this essay grew clearer. I see Thoreau in the American simple living efforts, and Muir in the preservation moment. My intimate knowledge of their life and work dates back less than a year, and I had to dig deep into my memory for a connection to the former, as seen in the reference to The Dead Poets Society (movie).

If I wanted to go deep, I needed a solid grasp on their personal perceived legacy, their life and works, and the temperaments I argued they represented. Needless to say, my efforts didn't do justice to Muir, whom I had the least connection with. He is both familiar and foreign. A fellow adventurer and enjoyer of life in all its forms, he's as much of a mystery as my own need for novelty. The HSP side of me needs to think deeply, and I have allowed it; it was thanks to it that I was able to find the meaning of my life, no matter how many years it has taken. Now, it wants to understand that which has shared its life yet has only just recently met. This new friend; it wants to know them better before making a judgement. Thus, it will not speak a word about it, which means Muir's section cannot be written. I accept it because I am satisfied. My attention was mostly on Thoreau, who read so familiar that the barriers of the self seemed to crumble. I never read non-fiction, perhaps because I didn't appreciate it until now. I am withholding further judgement, for there will be more opportunities to engage with the genre.

I close this draft with peace of mind, knowing that my need for heightened emotional experiences has been satisfied. On the one hand, the HSP was dying to craft its own basket of Thoreau's image, and the HSS wanted the thrill of pouring thoughts and feelings into heartfelt prose. Both objectives have been achieved. I can now sleep knowing that this won't be the last time I will be engaging with these men and their legacy but this is only the start of my journey with these new companions that remind me that the road I am traveled isn't off the beaten path, that there are other people, way before my time, who have been dissatisfied in their communities and dared to be different. There may be many differences between us, but our values align, our hopes and dreams, and most importantly, our passion for life and nature.  
   
  

# References

American Psychological Association. (n.d.). _APA Dictionary of Psychology_. Retrieved November 1st, from American Psychological Association (APA): [https://dictionary.apa.org/temperament](https://dictionary.apa.org/temperament)

Aron, E. N. (2010). _Psychotherapy and the Highly Sensitive Person._ New York: Routledge.

Muir, J. (2001). _The Wilderness World of John Muir._ Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Muir, J. (2008). _A passion for nature the life of John Muir._ Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Thoreau, H. D. (2009). _The Journals of Henry David Thoreau: 1837-1861._ New York: NYRB Classics.

Walls, L. D. (2017). _Henry David Thoreau, a life._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Zuckerman, M. (1979). _Sensation seeking: Beyond the optimal level of arousal._ Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbauhn Associates, Inc.